Proposal for moving data between two JBOD disks using Cruise Control (#106)
strimzi/proposals: 076-moving-data-between-two-jbod-disks-using-cruise-control.md

This endpoint will allow us to move the data between two JBOD disks. 

## Current situation

Currently, we get a multiple requests from community users to add the ability for moving all Kafka logs between two disks on the JBOD storage array. This feature can be useful in following scenarios:
- The current disk is too big and the user wants to use a smaller one and vice versa is true.
- When we want to use a different Storage Class with different parameters or different storage types.
- In case of disk removal to reduce the total storage.

For now, we can do this using the Kafka CLI tool i.e. `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` tool, but it takes a lot of manual steps which is time-consuming and not so user-friendly.

## Motivation

We should introduce the logic to Strimzi to leverage Cruise Control integration and make it possible to move the data between two JBOD disks.
This feature will also allow us to remove the disks without the loss of data.

## Proposal

Cruise Control provides `remove_disks` HTTP REST endpoint to move replicas from a specified disk to other disks of the same broker.

> This endpoint triggers a rebalancing operation by moving replicas in a size-based manner to the remaining disks, from the largest to the smallest, while checking the following constraint:

Reviewer: So, this is always intra-broker rebalancing not moving any data between brokers?

Author: Yes, its always intra-broker rebalancing.

Reviewer: Ok, thanks. Maybe its worth clarifying it in the proposal and in the future docs?

```sh

> 1 - (remainingUsageAfterRemoval / remainingCapacity) > errorMargin

Reviewer: Out of curiosity ... Does Cruise Control take into account the sizes of individual partitions and the free space on individual disks? E.g. what happens in a situation when:
* I have broker with 3 disks, each 100Gi
* The disks 1 and 2 have each 1Gi of free space
* The 3rd disk hosts only one partition with 1,5Gi in size
* User requests to remove the 3rd disk
* => The overall free capacity is 2Gi, so the partition fits to that. But because each of the remaining two disks has only 1Gi of free space, it cannot be moved safely. So what happens? Does Cruise Control handle it and fail?

Author: Yes, looking at the code 
```
            double futureUsage = 0.0;
            double remainingCapacity = 0.0;
            for (Disk disk : broker.disks()) {
                futureUsage += disk.utilization();
                if (!logDirsToRemove.contains(disk.logDir())) {
                    remainingCapacity += disk.capacity();
                }
            }
            if (futureUsage / remainingCapacity > capacityThreshold) {
                LOG.error("Not enough remaining capacity to move replicas to for broker {}.", brokerId);
                throw new IllegalArgumentException(String.format("Not enough remaining capacity to move replicas to for broker %d.", brokerId));
            }
        }
```
If we exceed the capacity threshold then in that case, Cruise control will report not enough capacity

Reviewer: But having multiple disks cannot be only dealt with through the threshold, or? Or what if the threshold is not big enough to detect the issue? In an extreme case, you can have something like this:
* Three 100Gi disks
* Three partitions, each 51Gi big, one on each disk
* What happens when you try to remove one of the disks? 
* You have 98Gi of free disk space on the remaining two disks. So the partitions from the third disk should seemingly fit in easily. But it will not.
 
Does Cruise Control give you a reasonable error and doesn't free the disk?

Author: I do see a check which makes sure that we are violating the disk capacity 
```

Author: I do see a check which makes sure that we are not violating the disk capacity while doing intra broker rebalancing
```
  /**
   * Check whether the movement of source replica to destination disk is acceptable for this goal.
   *
   * @param sourceReplica   Source replica.
   * @param destinationDisk Destination disk.
   * @return {@code true} if movement is acceptable for this goal, {@code false} otherwise.
   */
  private boolean isMovementAcceptableForCapacity(Replica sourceReplica, Disk destinationDisk) {
    double replicaUtilization = sourceReplica.load().expectedUtilizationFor(RESOURCE);
    return isUtilizationUnderLimitAfterAddingLoad(destinationDisk, replicaUtilization);
  }
```

Author: I n case the disk utilization is over limit we have this code handling the errors -> 
```
      for (Disk disk : broker.disks()) {
        if (disk.isAlive() && isUtilizationOverLimit(disk)) {
          // The utilization of the host for the resource is over the capacity limit.
          double requiredCapacity = disk.utilization() / _balancingConstraint.capacityThreshold(RESOURCE);
          ProvisionRecommendation recommendation = new ProvisionRecommendation.Builder(ProvisionStatus.UNDER_PROVISIONED)
              .numDisks(1).totalCapacity(requiredCapacity).build();
          throw new OptimizationFailureException(String.format("[%s] Utilization (%.2f) for disk %s on broker %d is above capacity limit.",
                                                               name(), disk.utilization(), disk, broker.id()), recommendation);
        }
        if (_shouldEmptyZeroCapacityDisks && disk.capacity() == 0 && !disk.replicas().isEmpty()) {
          throw new OptimizationFailureException(String.format("[%s] Could not move all replicas from disk %s on broker %d",
                                                               name(), disk.logDir(), broker.id()));
        }
      }
 ```

Reviewer: Is that a yes or no for my question?

Author: From what I understood from the code, Yes

Reviewer: Great, thanks.

```
where:
```sh
remainingUsageAfterRemoval = current usage for remaining disks + additional usage from removed disks
remainingCapacity = sum of capacities of the remaining disks
errorMargin = configurable property (default 0.1); it makes sure that a disk percentage is always free when moving replicas
```

In order to use the `remove_disks` endpoint in the Strimzi cluster operator, it would be added to the [`CruiseControlApi`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/resource/cruisecontrol/CruiseControlApi.java) interface and developing the corresponding implementation.

### Implementation

To implement this feature, we will be adding a new mode to the `KafkaRebalanceMode` class.

> * `remove_disks`: It moves replicas from a specified disk to other disks of the same broker. It always uses intra-broker re-balancing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `remove-disks`: It moves replicas from a specified disk to other disks of the same broker. It always uses intra-broker re-balancing.
```

> You can use this mode by changing the `spec.mode` to `remove_disks` in the `KafkaRebalance` resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use this mode by changing the `spec.mode` to `remove-disks` in the `KafkaRebalance` resource.
```

A `KafkaRebalance` custom resource would look like this.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:

>   mode: remove_disks

Reviewer 2: let's use `remove-disks` as for the other modes.

>   brokerAndVolumeIds:

Reviewer: I wonder if we should utilize the existing `brokers` field and just add new `volumes` field and combine them. It would not allow to remove different volumes form different brokers in one go. But I'm not sure that would matter for the use cases we have. If we don't do it, would calling it `brokersAndVolumes` make more sense given the `brokers` field name?

Reviewer: PS: Maybe we should see what for example @ppatierno thinks about this before you change it.

Reviewer 3: I also like `brokerAndVolumes`. Also, we use dash a separator for the other modes, so it shuold be `remove-disks`.

> It would not allow to remove different volumes form different brokers in one go. 

Why should we limit to only one broker? In a Kafka cluster is common to have the same storage configuration and sizing in all brokers. If the cluster is well balanced, you may need to remove disks on multiple brokers, and doing it in one go is great.

Reviewer 2: I would use something similar to the CC API (it has the `brokerid_and_logdirs` param) so maybe `brokersAndVolumes` as Jakub suggested is better than `brokerAndVolumeIds`.
Using already existing `brokers` list would add a limitation which CC doesn't have.
If we leave this API with, I guess the `volumeId` should be `volumeIds` instead being an array. AFAICS from the CC endpoint, you can list more log dirs on the same broker (i.e. `101-/tmp/kafka-logs-1,101-/tmp/kafka-logs-2`) so you could have something like this:

```yaml
brokersAndVolumes
- brokerId:101
  volumeIds: [1, 2]
- brokerId:102
  volumeIds: [0]
```

Author: Yeah, that sounds good. I will update POC and the proposal with this change

    - brokerId: 0
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 2

>       volumeIds: [1]

Reviewer: Are all these combinations packed into a single Cruise Control request? Is there any limit for the number of items this list can have?

Reviewer 2: Yes they will go all together in the query parameter, so something like `/remove_disks?brokerid_and_logdirs=0-/tmp/kafka-logs-1,0-/tmp/kafka-logs-2,2=-/tmp/kafka-logs-1`. From the CC code I didn't find any limit. It just parses a string using `,` as separator across brokers/volumes and `-` between broker id and log dir.

Reviewer: I gues the URL size will have some limit?

Reviewer 2: Good point. I didn't find anything useful in the official HTTP 1.1 RFC. I just found different length for different browsers which of course we don't use. From 2000 up to more and more.
Are you wondering if we should put a limit on how many brokers and volumes could be involved in order to limit that query parameter length?

Reviewer: Anyway, I guess if it has a separate item for each brokerID-logDir pair it doesn't matter as we cannot change that. I was mostly wondering if it would make sense to have a list of brokers or range for the `brokerId`. But it does not seem so. Thanks for the explanation @ppatierno

# ...
```

### Flow

- The user should be using the `Kafka` resource with JBOD configured. Make sure that you have more than one disk configured on the brokers.

> - When the Kafka cluster is ready, the user creates a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `spec.mode` field as `remove_disks` and the list of the broker and the corresponding logdirs to move in the `spec.brokerandlogdirs` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When the Kafka cluster is ready, the user creates a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `spec.mode` field as `remove-disks` and the list of the broker and the corresponding logdirs to move in the `spec.brokersAndVolumes` field.
```

- The `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` interacts with Cruise Control via the `/remove_disks` endpoint to perform the actual rebalancing.

Note: The optimization proposal will not show the load before optimization, it will only show the load after optimization. This is because in upstream Cruise Control, we don't have the verbose tag enabled with the `remove_disks` endpoint.

### Other Scenarios

- In case the user is not using JBOD storage and tries to generate the optimization proposal, the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state prompting invalid log dirs provided for the broker.
- If you are using JBOD with single disk configured on the brokers, in that case `KafkaRebalance` will move to `NotReady` state prompting that you don't have enough log dirs to move the repicas to for that broker.
- If the disk capacity has exceeded for the broker, in that case `KafkaRebalance` will move to `NotReady` prompting that enough capacity is not remaining to move replicas for that broker.
- This feature works fine with KafkaNodePools. 

> - This feature work with Kraft only if Kafka version is greater than 3.7.0, as that version supports multiple JBOD disks on brokers.

Reviewer: Will these errors be based on an error reported by Cruise Control? Or will our code need to handle this?

Author: These errors are based on errors reported by Cruise Control

Reviewer: You should make it clear in the proposal then who is responsible for the validation.

Reviewer: I think this still needs to be updated?

Author: Yes, on it.

remainingUsageAfterRemoval = current usage for remaining disks + additional usage from removed disks
remainingCapacity = sum of capacities of the remaining disks
errorMargin = configurable property (default 0.1); it makes sure that a disk percentage is always free when moving replicas
```

In order to use the `remove_disks` endpoint in the Strimzi cluster operator, it would be added to the [`CruiseControlApi`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/resource/cruisecontrol/CruiseControlApi.java) interface and developing the corresponding implementation.

### Implementation

To implement this feature, we will be adding a new mode to the `KafkaRebalanceMode` class.
* `remove-disks`: It moves replicas from a specified disk to other disks of the same broker. It always uses intra-broker re-balancing.
You can use this mode by changing the `spec.mode` to `remove-disks` in the `KafkaRebalance` resource.

A `KafkaRebalance` custom resource would look like this.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster

> spec:

Author: Sure

  mode: remove-disks
  brokersAndVolumes:
    - brokerId: 0

>       volumeIds: [1, 2]

Reviewer 4: In conjunction with the `mode: remove-disks` it's not clear whether this should be interpreted as 
* "I want broker 0 to end up with just volumes 1 and 2; remove any others". Resources in Kubernetes are normally declarative, so this its a reasonable interpretation for someone who doesn't know the semantics of the resource.
* "I want to remove volumes 1 and 2 from broker 0". `KafkaRebalance` is intrinsically imperative/specifying an action, so this its a reasonable interpretation for someone who know that.

And actually both those interpretations are wrong! The 2nd is closer, but it won't actually remove the volumes (in the kube sense), it just moves the data.

Perhaps renaming `brokersAndVolumes` to something like `moveReplicasOffVolumes` (or `movingReplicasOffVolumes` or some alternative) would make that clearer. I'm not sure we need to include the word broker or even volume, since the items in the array make clear we're talking about volumes within brokers.

Reviewer: I don't think this is completely wrong. But I think we also need to keep in mind the existing parts of the API that already exist in this way for a long time. So I wonder if we should prefer inconsistency over something what might not be completely clear. I personally would probably prefer consistency.

Reviewer 4: I agree consistency is a good thing. But good APIs are also a good thing. I wonder if we should take a moment to consider what other CC features we might want to integrate into this CR and how well they they'd fit with `brokersAndVolumes`. Otherwise I can see that the consistency argument might be used to justify an even more distasteful compromise in the future.

Author: Okay, I will change the name to `moveReplicasOffVolumes`, that sound good to me

    - brokerId: 2
      volumeIds: [1]
# ...
```

### Flow

- The user should be using the `Kafka` resource with JBOD configured. Make sure that you have more than one disk configured on the brokers.

> - When the Kafka cluster is ready, the user creates a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `spec.mode` field as `remove-disks` and the list of the brokers and the corresponding volumes to move in the `spec.brokersAndVolumes` field.

Reviewer 4: "volumes to move" is really confusing. The volumes don't move! The replicas on them do.

Author: I will fix this

- The `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` interacts with Cruise Control via the `/remove_disks` endpoint to generate an optimization proposal (by using the dryrun feature).
- You can use `strimzi.io/rebalance-auto-approval:true` annotation on the `KafkaRebalance` resource for auto-approval of proposal. In case you want to do it manually you can do it by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance=approve` annotation on it.
- The `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` interacts with Cruise Control via the `/remove_disks` endpoint to perform the actual rebalancing.

Note: The optimization proposal will not show the load before optimization, it will only show the load after optimization. This is because in upstream Cruise Control, we don't have the verbose tag enabled with the `remove_disks` endpoint.

### Other Scenarios

- In case the user is not using JBOD storage and tries to generate the optimization proposal, the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state prompting invalid log dirs provided for the broker.

> - If you are using JBOD with single disk configured on the brokers, in that case `KafkaRebalance` will move to `NotReady` state prompting that you don't have enough log dirs to move the repicas to for that broker.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- If you are using JBOD with single disk configured on the brokers, in that case `KafkaRebalance` will move to `NotReady` state prompting that you don't have enough log dirs to move the replicas for that broker.
```

- If the disk capacity has exceeded for the broker, in that case `KafkaRebalance` will move to `NotReady` prompting that enough capacity is not remaining to move replicas for that broker.
- This feature works fine with KafkaNodePools. 

> - This feature work with Kraft only if Kafka version is greater than 3.7.0, as that version supports multiple JBOD disks on brokers.

Reviewer 4: In the above description you said " When the Kafka cluster is ready", so I need closure on the scenario where the Kafka cluster is not initially ready.

Author: When the Kafka Cluster is not ready, we have a check in place in the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` which will move the `KafkaRebalance` resource to `NotReady` prompting the reason  as `Kafka Cluster is not ready` in the `status` field of the rebalance resource. So basically its a pre-check which needs to be met.

> - This feature work with Kraft only if Kafka version is greater than 3.7.0, as that version supports multiple JBOD disks on brokers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- This feature works with Kraft only if Kafka version is greater than 3.7.0, as that version supports multiple JBOD disks on brokers.
```

For now, we can do this using the Kafka CLI tool i.e. `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` tool, but it takes a lot of manual steps which is time-consuming and not so user-friendly.

## Motivation

We should introduce the logic to Strimzi to leverage Cruise Control integration and make it possible to move the data between two JBOD disks.
This feature will also allow us to remove the disks without the loss of data.

## Proposal

Cruise Control provides `remove_disks` HTTP REST endpoint to move replicas from a specified disk to other disks of the same broker. It always uses intra-broker re-balancing.
This endpoint triggers a rebalancing operation by moving replicas in a size-based manner to the remaining disks, from the largest to the smallest, while checking the following constraint:
```sh
1 - (remainingUsageAfterRemoval / remainingCapacity) > errorMargin
```
where:
```sh
remainingUsageAfterRemoval = current usage for remaining disks + additional usage from removed disks
remainingCapacity = sum of capacities of the remaining disks
errorMargin = configurable property (default 0.1); it makes sure that a disk percentage is always free when moving replicas
```

> In order to use the `remove_disks` endpoint in the Strimzi cluster operator, it would be added to the [`CruiseControlApi`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/resource/cruisecontrol/CruiseControlApi.java) interface and developing the corresponding implementation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To use the `remove_disks` endpoint in the Strimzi cluster operator, it should be added to the [`CruiseControlApi`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/resource/cruisecontrol/CruiseControlApi.java) interface, and the corresponding implementation developed.
```

### Implementation

To implement this feature, we will be adding a new mode to the `KafkaRebalanceMode` class.
* `remove-disks`: It moves replicas from a specified disk to other disks of the same broker. It always uses intra-broker re-balancing.
You can use this mode by changing the `spec.mode` to `remove-disks` in the `KafkaRebalance` resource.

A `KafkaRebalance` custom resource would look like this.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  # setting the mode as `remove-disks` to move data between the JBOD disks
  mode: remove-disks
  # providing the list of brokers, and the corresponding volumes from which you want to move the replicas
  moveReplicasOffVolumes:
    - brokerId: 0
      volumeIds: [1, 2]
    - brokerId: 2
      volumeIds: [1]
# ...
```

### Flow

> - The user should be using the `Kafka` resource with JBOD configured. Make sure that you have more than one disk configured on the brokers.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The user should be using the `Kafka` resource with JBOD configured, making sure that they have more than one disk configured on the brokers.
```

> - When the Kafka cluster is ready, the user creates a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `spec.mode` field as `remove-disks` and provides list of the brokers, and the corresponding volumes from which you want to move the replicas in the `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field.

Reviewer 2: what happens if the user set the mode but forgets to set the `moveReplicasOffVolumes` field? I guess the operator should check it and put the resource in `NotReady` with a proper condition warning. Can we make it clear here?

Author: Sure, I can add an extra sentence saying
```
In case, the user forgets to set the `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field, then the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state prompting that `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field is missing`
```
Does this sound good?

Reviewer 2: I would not say "user forgets", just that the field is missing :-)

Author: I added the extra sentence

> - When the Kafka cluster is ready, the user creates a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `spec.mode` field as `remove-disks` and provides list of the brokers, and the corresponding volumes from which you want to move the replicas in the `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field. In case, the `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field is not set, then the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state prompting that `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field is missing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- When the Kafka cluster is ready, the user creates a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `spec.mode` field as `remove-disks` and provides a list of the brokers, and the corresponding volumes from which they want to move the replicas in the `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field. In case, the `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field is not set, then the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state prompting that `spec.moveReplicasOffVolumes` field is missing.
```

- The `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` interacts with Cruise Control via the `/remove_disks` endpoint to generate an optimization proposal (by using the dryrun feature).
- You can use `strimzi.io/rebalance-auto-approval:true` annotation on the `KafkaRebalance` resource for auto-approval of proposal. In case you want to do it manually you can do it by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance=approve` annotation on it.
- The `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` interacts with Cruise Control via the `/remove_disks` endpoint to perform the actual rebalancing.

> Note: The optimization proposal will not show the load before optimization, it will only show the load after optimization. This is because in upstream Cruise Control, we don't have the verbose tag enabled with the `remove_disks` endpoint.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> **NOTE** The optimization proposal will not show the load before optimization, it will only show the load after optimization. This is because in upstream Cruise Control we don't have the verbose tag enabled with the `remove_disks` endpoint.
```

### Other Scenarios

- In case the user is not using JBOD storage and tries to generate the optimization proposal, the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state prompting invalid log dirs provided for the broker.
- If you are using JBOD with single disk configured on the brokers, in that case `KafkaRebalance` will move to `NotReady` state prompting that you don't have enough log dirs to move the replicas for that broker.
- If the disk capacity has exceeded for the broker, in that case `KafkaRebalance` will move to `NotReady` prompting that enough capacity is not remaining to move replicas for that broker.

> - This feature works fine with KafkaNodePools. 

Reviewer 2: Do we need this sentence? What does it add/mean? We have everything now moving to node pools (mostly because KRaft) so I would expect that any new features will work fine with node pools as explicit.

Author: There was earlier a commet by @scholzj, if it will work fine with nodepools and KRaft, therefore I thought it would be good to mention about all of them. I agree, any new feature should work with nodepool but just for clarity maybe we can still have this pointer.

> - This feature works fine with KafkaNodePools. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- This feature works fine with `KafkaNodePool` resources. 
```

> - This feature works with Kraft only if Kafka version is greater than 3.7.0, as that version supports multiple JBOD disks on brokers.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- This feature works with KRaft only if Kafka version is greater than 3.7.0, as that version supports multiple JBOD disks on brokers.
```

> The errors in the above scenarios are reported by Cruise Control. Based on those we move the `KafkaRebalance` resource to `NotReady` state and update the `KafkaRebalance` status with the corresponding error message.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Errors for these scenarios are reported by Cruise Control. 
Based on these errors, we transition the `KafkaRebalance` resource to the `NotReady` state and update its status with the corresponding error message.
```

- This feature works fine with KafkaNodePools. 
- This feature work with Kraft only if Kafka version is greater than 3.7.0, as that version supports multiple JBOD disks on brokers.

> The errors in the above scenarios are reported by Cruise Control. Based on those we move the `KafkaRebalance` resource to `NotReady` state and update the `KafkaRebalance` status with the corresponding error message.

Author: Does this sound good @scholzj?
